UMUC CMIS141 
Introduction to Java Programming
by Y. Daniel Liang

Chapter 14
===

14.1 Introduction
===

Exception handling enables a program to deal with exceptional situations and continue normal execution.

Runtime errors occur when the JVM encounters impossible operations while the program is running like array out of bounds.

14.2 Exception-handling overview
===

Exceptions are thrown from a method. The caller of the method can catch and handle the exception.

Methods shouldn't terminate programs the caller should. For instance main().

A catch block is much like a method definition:

	catch(ArithmeticException ex)

An exception may be thrown directly in a try block or from a method being called.

Typically a library method will throw exceptions but not handle them because it doesn't know how to handle the exception only the caller does.

14.3 Exception Types
===

Exceptions are objects, and objects are defined using classes. The root class for exceptions is java.lang.Throwable

There are many types and you can even define your own.

All exception classes inherit directly or indirectly from the Throwable class.

Three types of exceptions:

1. System errors - Thrown by JVM represented in the Error class.
2. Exceptions - represented in the Exception class. Caused by our code and external sources.
3. Runtime Exceptions - In the RuntimeException class. Generally thrown by the JVM and represent bad programming.

Unchecked Exceptions are the RuntimeException and Error classes. All other Exceptions are considered 'checked' exceptions. You do not need to write code and try-catch blocks for unchecked exceptions.

14.4 More on Exception Handling
===

A handler for an exception is found by propagating the exception backward through a chain of method calls, starting from the current method.

Java handles exceptions in a 3 step model:

1. Declaring exceptions
2. Throwing an exception
3. Catching an exception

```java

// Throwing Exceptions
method() throws Exception {
	
	if(an error occurs) {
		throw new Exception();
	}
}

// Catching Exceptions
method1() {
	try {
		method();
	}
	catch (Exception ex) {
		// Process exception.
	}
}

```

14.4.1 Declaring Exceptions
===

Every method must state the types of checked exceptions it might throw; known as declaring exceptions.

To declare an exception add it to the method header:

	public void myMethod() throws IOException

Multiple exceptions are comma seperated:

	public void myMethod() throws Exception1, Exception2, ... ExceptionN

If exceptions are not declared in a superclass, you cannot override the method in a sub-class and add exceptions. (Tricky...)

14.4.2 Throwing Exceptions
===

Most exception classes have two constructors, a no-arg and a string.

	throw new IllegalArgumentException("This is the note about the exception.");

	throw new IllegalArgumentException();

14.4.3 Catching Exceptions
===

```java

try {
	statements;
}
catch (Exception1 ex) {
	
}
catch (Exception2 ex2) {
	
}
catch (Exception3 ex3) {
	
}
```

Catch blocks are skipped if no exceptions occur in a try block.

Java skips the remaining statements in a try block if an exception occurs.

Each catch block is checked from first to last until a handler is found when an exception occurs.

If no handler is found java exits the method and trys the same process in the methods caller and recursively until no more methods are left to check.

THis is called catching an exception.

Compiler errors will occur if a superclass exception such as Exception is checked before a subclass like IllegalArgumentException.

JDK 7 includes handling for multi catch statements:

```java
catch (Exception1 | Exception2 | ExceptionN ex) {
	// Handle.
}
```

14.4.4 Getting informaiton from Exceptions
===

The following methods of the Throwable class can be used to get additional informaiton about an exception object.

1. getMessage() : String
2. toString() : String
3. printStackTrace() : void
4. getStackTrace() : StackTraceElement[]

14.5 Finally Clause
===

The finally clause is always executed regardless whether an exception occurred or not.

```java
try {
	statements;
}
catch (ThrownException ex) {
	// Handle.
}
finally {
	// Do this everytime. Like clean up a DB connection or file pointer.
}
```

14.6 When to use Exceptions
===

A method should throw an exception if the error needs to be handled by its caller.

Seperating error handling code in catch blocks makes the code easier to read.

Don't throw exception objects if the current method can solve the problem itself.

If an exception will occur in many places in a program an exception class is appropriate. If an exception will only occur in a single method use if statements to avoid the problem.

Avoid try-catch blocks for simple problems that can be checked with an if statement.

Don't abuse exception handling to solve simple problems that can be checked with an if statement.

14.7 Rethrowing Exceptions
===

Java allows an exception handler to rethrow the exception if the handler cannot process the exception or simply wants to let its caller be notified of the exception.

14.8 Chained Exceptions
===

Throwing an exception along with another exception forms a chained exception.

Basically just tack on the previous exception object ot the end of the new exceptions parameter list.

```java

try {
	
}
catch (Exception oldEx) {
	throw new Exception("New exception details", oldEx);
}
```

14.9 Defining Custom Exception Classes
===

You can define a custom exception class by extending the java.lang.Exception class.

14.10 The File Class
===

The File class contains the methods for obtaining the properties of a file/directory and for renaming and deleting a file/directory.

The File class doesn't contain methods for reading/writing to files. It's purpose is to contian the meta for a file.

The File Name is a string to the File constructor.

	new File("C:\\book\CH9.md");

the isDirectory() method will check if a File object is actually a directory. isFile() does the opposite.

The \ is a part of the Filenames in Windows but is a special character in Java so it should be written \\

Creating File objects doesn't actually create the file. If you randomly create a File object you can check if it exists with the exists() method.

Use filenames relative to the current directory to avoid compatiblility problems between Windows/Unix.

The / in filenames in Java is platform independent file seperator and works on Windows and unix.

14.11 Writing Data Using PrintWriter
===

The java.io.PrintWriter class can be used to create a file and write data to a text file. First, you have to create a PrintWriter object for a text file as follows:

	PrintWriter output = new PrintWriter(filename);

Then print, println, and printf methods on PrintWriter will write data to the file.

The close() method must be used to close a file.

	output.close();

14.11.2 Reading Data Using Scanner
===

java.util.Scanner is used to read Strings and primitives from the console with System.in. It can also be used with files by passing Scanner a File object:

	Scanner input = new Scanner(new File(filepath));

14.12 File Dialogs
===

JFileChooser is a GUI component for displaying a file dialog.

javax.swing.JFileChoser.

14.13 Reading Data from the Web
===

Just like you can read data from a file on your computer, you can read data from a file on the Web.

To create a URL Object use the java.net.URL class:

	new URL("http://www.google.com/index.html");

The URL class can use the URL to create an input stream:

	Scanner input = new Scanner(url.openStream());